

(2 LAYER CAKE) Simple Chocolate Birthday Cake with Whipped Chocolate Buttercream.

cook time: 25 MINUTES

total time: 1 HOUR

yields: ONE 2 LAYER CAKE

Cake For 2 Layers 1 1/2 cups all-purpose flour 1 1/2 cups granulated sugar 1 cup unsweetened cocoa powder 1 1/2 teaspoons baking soda 1 1/2 teaspoons baking powder 1 teaspoon salt 2 eggs, at room temperature* 3/4 cup buttermilk 1/4 cup plain greek yogurt 1/2 cup canola oil 1 tablespoon vanilla extract 3/4 cup strong brewed coffee, hot 1/2 cup semi-sweet chocolate chips (optional)

Whipped Chocolate Buttercream For 2 Layers 3 (1 1/2 cups) sticks salted butter, softened to room temperature 3 cups powdered sugar 3/4 cup unsweetened cocoa powder 2 teaspoons vanilla extract 3-4 tablespoons heavy whipping cream Instructions

For the cake: Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Grease 2 8-inch round cake pans. Line with parchment paper, then butter/spray with cooking spray.In a medium size bowl combine the flour, sugar, unsweetened cocoa powder, baking soda, baking powder and salt. Set aside.In the bowl of a stand mixer (or use a hand held mixer) beat together the eggs, buttermilk, greek yogurt, canola oil and vanilla until smooth.Slowly add the dry ingredients to the wet ingredients with the mixer on low until there are no longer any clumps of flour. Add the hot coffee and mix until combined. Batter should be pourable, but not super thin. Stir in the chocolate chips, if using.Pour the batter among the 2 cake pans and bake 20 to 25 minutes, until the tops are just set and no longer wiggly in the center. Remove and let cool five minutes, then run a knife around the edges of the pan. Grab 2 large flat plates, line them with wax or parchment paper and invert the cakes onto the paper lined plates. Cover and let the cakes cool completely before frosting.For the Frosting: Add the butter and powdered sugar to the bowl of a stand mixer (or use a hand held mixer). Beat the butter and powdered sugar together until the butter is light and fluffy, about 4 minutes. Add the cocoa powder and vanilla and beat, scrapping down the sides as needed another 2 minutes or until there are no streaks of white. Add 3 tablespoons of the heavy cream and whip the frosting for 2-4 minutes or until light and fluffy. If desired add the remaining tablespoon of the heavy cream (I normally do) and whip until combined. Taste the frosting and add more powdered sugar if you like a sweeter or thicker frosting.Place 1 layer, flat side up, on a plate or cake stand. With a knife or offset spatula, spread the top with frosting. Place the second layer on top, rounded side up, and spread the frosting evenly on the top and sides of the cake. Decorate with sprinkles, chocolate curls or whatever your heart desires. *To quickly bring eggs to room temperature place them in a bowl and fill with warm water. Let them sit five minutes.
